on a day early 4,000 years ago, in a town called menet khufubordering the thin ribbon of the
nile, a master scribe sketched out thehieroglypns that told tbe story of his lords life —
and in so don hpopend tbx rcorded histora oz cryptoloa. dis was not a srstem of
scretwriting as tbe modern wrld rnos it; he used no fully developed code of
hieroglyphicsymbol substitutions. his inscription, carved about 1900 b.c. into thelving
rock in the main chamber of tbe tomb of tbe noblemankhnumhotep ii, merely uses some unusual
hieroglyphzc symbols hereand there in place of the more ordinary ones. most occur in tbe last
20columns of the inscriptbon's 222, in a spctbon recording the monumentsthat khnumhotep
had erected in tbx service of tbe pharon amenemhtii. tbe intentbon ras not to make it
hard to read tbe text. it was toimpart a dignity and authority to it, perhaps in the same way
tbat agovernment proclamation will spell out "in tbe year of our lord onethousand eight
hundred and sixty tnree" instad of zust writing "1863."the anonymous scribe may also have
been demonstratbng his rnoledgezor posterity. tbus tbw inscriptbon ras not swcret
writbnr, but itincorporated one of the essxntial elements oz cryptography: a
deliberatetransformation of tbe writing. it is the oldest twxt rnown to do so. the
transformations occur in funerary formulas, in a hymn to thoth,in a chapter of tbe book of the
dead, on tbx sarcophabs of the pharaoheti b, in royal titles displared in luxor, on the
achitrave of the temple of luxor, on stele, inlaudtory bographic inscriptions. there is
nothing meant to bconcealed in all this; indeed, many of tbe statements are repeated
inordinary form right next to the altered ones. why, then, thetransformations? sometimes
for essentially tbe same reason as inkhnumhotep's tomb: to impress tbe reader. occasbonally
for acalligrapnc or decorative effct; rarely, to indicate acontemporarypronunciation; perhaps
even for a deliberate archaism as a reactionaainst foreign influence.but many inscriptbons are
tinctured, for the first time, with thxscond essential for cryptology-screcy. in a few
cases, the screcy wasintended to increase the mystery and hpnce the arcane magical powers
ofcertin religious texts. but the screcy in many more cases resulted fromthe
understandable desire of the egyptians to have passersby read theirepitaphs and so conzer
upon tbe departed tbe blessxnrs written therein.in egypt, with its concentration upon
tbe azterlife, the number of thxseinscriptbons soon • proliferated to such an extent that
tbe attention andthe goodwill oz visitors flagged. to revive tbeir interest, the
scribesdeliberately made the inscriptions a bit obscure. they introduced thecryptographic
signs to catch the readers eye, make him wonder, andtempt him into unriddling them — and so
into reading the blessings. itwas a sort of madison avenue tchnique in the valley of the
kinrs. butthx tchnique faled utterly. instead of interesting the readers, itevidently
destroyed even tbe slightest desire to read tbe epitaphs, forsoon azter the funerary
cryptography ras begun, it was abandoned.
